A game about making sacrifices! 

The third game of Project GIPF. For 2 players.

Strange… A board that gets smaller and two players playing with the same marbles... In the beginning you'll have to get used to it, but once you do, you'll find out that there are many ways to get the game under control. Play the right marble at the right place at the right moment, and you'll gain the upper hand. 


Components 
- 6 white marbles
- 8 gray marbles
- 10 black marbles
- 37 hexagonal board pieces, called rings. 

A. Aim
You must try to capture either 
- 3 marbles of each color,
- or 4 white marbles,
- or 5 gray marbles, 
- or 6 black marbles. 
The winner is the first player to achieve one of these goals. 

B. Preparation

1. Take 37 rings and assemble a hexagonal game board.
2. The 6 white, 8 grey and 10 black marbles are the “pool”. Put the pool next to the board, so that both players can easily reach the marbles. 
3. Draw lots to determine who will go first. 

C. Making a move
When it is your turn, there are two possible moves: you either place a marble of any color on the board and then remove a ring, or you capture one or more marbles. 

Placing a marble and removing a board piece
1. When it is your turn, you first select a marble from the pool. Next you must place it on the board. You may select any color you wish and you may place the marble on any vacant ring.
Important: the marbles, in the pool as well as on the board, belong to both players (i.e. neither you, nor your opponent have your “own” marbles to play with).
2. After you have placed a marble on the board, you must remove a “free” ring. “Free” means: the ring must be vacant and it must be positioned at the edge of the board. In other words, there may not be a marble on it and you must be able to remove it from the sides without disturbing the position of the remaining rings. 

3. Placing a marble and removing a ring is one turn. You must do both. 

Capturing marbles
1. Capturing is compulsory; you must do it if you can. 
2. To capture a marble, you must jump over it with another marble (i.e. as in checkers). You may only jump over a marble on an adjacent ring. You may jump in any direction if there is a vacant ring behind the marble that you intend to capture.
3. The color of the marbles is of no importance when capturing: you may jump with any marble over any other marble, no matter the color, no matter whether you or your opponent placed it on the board.
For example: you put a white marble on the board. A few moves later your opponent places a grey marble next to it. There is a vacant ring behind both marbles. You may select the option you think is most advantageous: jumping with the white marble over the grey one or the other way around.
4. If you jump over a marble and you have the possibility to jump over a second one, then you must do so, no matter in which direction you make the second (or third) jump.
5. If you can capture different numbers of marbles (e.g. in one direction 1 marble and in another direction 2 marbles), you may freely chose which possibility you’ll go for. 
6. Capturing one or more marbles counts as a complete move. In other words: that turn you may not place a marble, nor may you remove a ring. 

E. End of the game
As mentioned at the beginning of these rules: the first player to obtain either 3 marbles of each color, or 4 white marbles, or 5 grey marbles, or 6 black marbles wins the game. 



Based on: http://www.gipf.com/zertz/rules/rules.html